Distributed Systems, LLM Ensemble, Multi-Agent Inference, Local
Deployment, Reproducible Benchmarking, Statistical Testing

Introduction

Modern language-model systems are often evaluated as single-model
endpoints, even when deployment environments can host several
specialized models at once. In practice, many teams now run local model
stacks for privacy, cost control, and predictable operation. This
creates a direct systems question: how should a local orchestrator
combine multiple model outputs so that quality improves without making
runtime impractical?

This paper answers that question through a working distributed
implementation and a full benchmark pipeline. The system was not
designed as a toy prototype; it was built to support day-to-day
experimentation and manuscript-ready reporting. One node receives user
requests, forwards prompts to multiple agent nodes, applies a selected
aggregation strategy, and logs full metadata for every run. The same
framework then drives repeated benchmark execution and significance
analysis.

Three goals guided the work:

1.  Engineering reliability: make multi-node orchestration stable under
    CPU-constrained and mixed-hardware environments.

2.  Method comparison: evaluate multiple aggregation strategies under
    identical controls.

3.  Publication readiness: produce reproducible outputs that can be
    inserted into a conference manuscript without manual reconstruction.

The design and evaluation choices are influenced by prior work on
self-consistency , crowd aggregation , and surprising popularity , but
adapted to a local distributed serving context.

Related Literature and Positioning

Consistency-Based Aggregation

Self-consistency methods show that sampling diversity can improve
reasoning quality when outputs are consolidated carefully . Most prior
formulations evaluate repeated samples from one model. The present work
differs in two ways: first, diversity comes from distinct model
endpoints rather than repeated sampling from the same endpoint; second,
strategy comparison includes system-level costs such as end-to-end
latency and operational variance. This distinction matters in local
deployment, where both compute and memory are finite and every
additional model call carries visible runtime overhead.

Crowd Aggregation Signals

The crowd-wisdom perspective  motivates majority and weighted voting
under heterogeneous participants. The surprising popularity line  adds
second-order signals by asking how respondents expect others to answer.
Translating that concept to model ensembles gives a practical mechanism
for identifying underrepresented but plausible answers. In this paper,
that mechanism appears as inverse surprising popularity, where observed
vote mass and predicted-majority mass are combined in a single score.

Local Serving Frameworks

Practical local serving now relies on lightweight model runtimes and
HTTP-based orchestration. Ollama  simplifies model packaging and
endpoint management, while FastAPI  provides a compact asynchronous
service layer. The novelty in this study is not a new serving framework,
but the way these tools are combined into a full reproducible research
workflow: one endpoint for strategy-controlled inference, one benchmark
runner for repeated trials, and one artifact pipeline for paper-ready
outputs.

Gap Addressed by This Work

Many reports focus on benchmark scores but provide incomplete deployment
details, making independent reproduction difficult. Other reports
provide architecture sketches but limited statistical evidence. This
work explicitly targets both sides at once: deployment realism and
statistical rigor. The result is a tightly coupled engineering and
evaluation pipeline where each reported number can be traced to a stored
run artifact.

Deployment Context and Architecture

Infrastructure Summary

The cluster runs on Ubuntu 24.04 virtual machines  in a private subnet.
The deployed node layout used in this study is:

-   orchestrator: 172.16.185.223

-   agent-1: 172.16.185.209 (llama3.2:3b)

-   agent-2: 172.16.185.218 (qwen2.5:3b)

-   agent-3: 172.16.185.220 (phi3:mini)

-   agent-4: 172.16.185.222 (gemma2:2b)

The orchestrator is implemented in FastAPI . Each agent uses Ollama  and
exposes a REST endpoint on port 11434.

Request Flow

The request lifecycle is intentionally simple.

1.  The orchestrator receives a prompt and runtime controls.

2.  It sends asynchronous requests to selected agents.

3.  It normalizes responses and computes per-agent metadata.

4.  It applies the chosen aggregation strategy.

5.  It returns the final answer plus full intermediate records.

Service Endpoints

The orchestrator API surface uses three endpoints:

-   GET /health: liveness and readiness check.

-   GET /agents: active agent list and endpoint health.

-   POST /query: strategy-controlled ensemble inference.

Implementation Details

Orchestrator Internals

The orchestrator is structured into small modules with clear ownership
boundaries: request parsing, asynchronous dispatch, response
normalization, aggregation, metric logging, and artifact export. This
decomposition reduced failure propagation during debugging because each
stage could be validated independently. The request parser enforces
defaults for seed, deterministic mode, temperature, and maximum tokens,
ensuring that benchmark runs cannot silently drift due to missing
runtime fields.

At dispatch time, the orchestrator creates one asynchronous client task
per selected agent. All tasks run under explicit timeout control. The
gather stage records success, timeout, and parsing status separately, so
partial failures still return a valid aggregate response rather than a
global 500 error. This behavior proved useful in long benchmark runs
where one slow agent should not invalidate an entire repetition batch.

Agent Contract

Each agent returns a normalized envelope with five essential fields:
model id, answer text, latency in milliseconds, token count, and
optional confidence metadata. The orchestrator stores raw and normalized
answers side by side. Raw text is preserved for audit and debugging,
while normalized text drives metric computation. This dual storage model
avoids one common reproducibility issue in benchmark pipelines: losing
the original model output after aggressive post-processing.

Logging and Provenance

Every query writes one structured record with:

-   query id and UTC timestamp,

-   selected strategy and topic route,

-   selected agent ids,

-   per-agent latency and token usage,

-   aggregate answer and agreement score,

-   host resource snapshot at query end.

The same schema is used for interactive and benchmark requests. This
decision enables direct comparability between ad hoc manual tests and
scripted evaluation runs.

Failure Recovery and Guardrails

Four guardrails were critical in practice:

1.  endpoint health checks before benchmark launch,

2.  retry-safe request identifiers at the orchestrator layer,

3.  deterministic mode for reruns after partial failure,

4.  explicit rejection when selected model subset is empty.

Together, these controls reduced wasted benchmark time and made
post-failure diagnosis straightforward.

Aggregation Formulation

For a prompt q, the orchestrator receives a response set
ℛ(q) = {r₁, r₂, …, r_(n)},
where each response is
r_(i) = (a_(i),ℓ_(i),τ_(i),m_(i),c_(i)).
Here a_(i) is answer text, ℓ_(i) is latency, τ_(i) is token count, m_(i)
is model id, and c_(i) is a confidence proxy.

The ensemble selects
ŷ = arg max_(y ∈ 𝒴)S(y∣ℛ,Θ),
where S(⋅) is strategy-specific and Θ includes weights, routing rules,
and deterministic controls.

Majority Voting

Let v_(i)(y) = 1 if agent i outputs normalized answer y, else 0.
Majority score:
$$S_{\text{maj}}(y)=\sum_{i=1}^{n} v_i(y).$$

Dynamic Weighted Voting

Weighted score:
$$S_{\text{w}}(y)=\sum_{i=1}^{n} w_i\,v_i(y), \quad \sum_i w_i=1,$$
with online update
w_(i)^((t+1)) = αw_(i)^((t)) + (1−α) acc_(i)^((t)).

Inverse Surprising Popularity

Each agent provides a first-order answer and a predicted majority
answer. Let f(y) denote observed frequency and g(y) denote
predicted-majority frequency. The score is
S_(isp)(y) = f(y) − λg(y),
which favors answers supported by direct votes but under-anticipated by
second-order belief.

Topic-Based Routing

A lightweight topic classifier maps prompt q to topic t ∈ 𝒯. A
topic-specific subset 𝒜_(t) is selected, then the chosen base voting
rule runs on that subset.

Two-Round Debate

Round 1 collects independent responses. Round 2 asks each agent to
revise after seeing peer summaries. The final vote uses revised answers.
This adds interpretability but increases latency.

Complexity and Cost Model

If the average one-agent inference time is $\bar{\ell}$ and asynchronous
overhead is ϵ, direct strategies have wall-clock cost close to
T_(direct) ≈ max_(i)ℓ_(i) + ϵ.
By contrast, two-round debate requires two coordinated fan-out phases
and intermediate synthesis:
T_(debate) ≈ max_(i)ℓ_(i)⁽¹⁾ + max_(i)ℓ_(i)⁽²⁾ + ϵ′.
This cost model aligns with observed results, where debate latency is
substantially above direct strategies. In local deployments, this gap
directly affects user-perceived responsiveness and benchmark wall time.

Agreement Metrics

Let n be number of participating agents and n^(*) the count supporting
the winning answer. Agreement rate is:
$$\text{Agreement} = \frac{n^*}{n}.$$
Agreement is reported together with accuracy because high agreement with
low accuracy can indicate consensus drift, while low agreement with high
accuracy can indicate fragile correctness.

System Engineering and Runtime Optimization

Bottlenecks Observed During Deployment

Early runs showed three recurring bottlenecks:

1.  repeated model calls across similar strategies,

2.  unnecessary second debate round when round-1 agreement was already
    complete,

3.  excessive output length on small CPU nodes.

Implemented Optimizations

The final system applies:

-   shared fan-out cache for direct strategies (majority, weighted, isp,
    topic),

-   debate early-stop when first-round agreement reaches threshold,

-   token-budget controls to cap response length under constrained
    hardware,

-   normalized answer extraction to stabilize metric parsing.

[Runtime profile before and after optimization steps.]

Deterministic Controls

Every benchmark run stores seed, temperature, strategy, selected agents,
repetition index, and sample index. Deterministic mode can be enabled
per run, which greatly reduces run-to-run variance during ablation.

Experimental Design

Benchmarks

Three public benchmarks are used:

-   MMLU 

-   GSM8K 

-   TruthfulQA 

Protocol

For each strategy, benchmark, and repetition:

1.  sample controlled subset,

2.  execute through /query,

3.  parse normalized final answer,

4.  log latency, agreement, and resource usage,

5.  store records in CSV and JSON.

The primary dependent variables are accuracy, F1, mean latency, latency
standard deviation, and agreement rate. Independent variables are
strategy type, benchmark set, repetition number, deterministic flag, and
token budget.

Statistical Analysis

Two paired tests are applied to repeated-run score vectors:

-   paired t-test,

-   Wilcoxon signed-rank test.

A comparison is treated as statistically meaningful only when both tests
satisfy p < 0.05.

Confidence Interval Reporting

For each strategy and metric, the mean over repetitions is reported with
a 95% confidence interval:
$$\bar{x} \pm t_{0.975,\,n-1}\frac{s}{\sqrt{n}},$$
where x̄ is sample mean, s is sample standard deviation, and n is
repetition count. This interval is included in exported JSON records and
used in chart annotation during report generation.

Variable Isolation

To preserve comparability, only one independent variable is changed at a
time in controlled runs. For example, when strategy effects are
measured, seed, deterministic flag, prompt budget, and benchmark subset
remain fixed. The same principle is used when testing runtime
optimizations: optimization toggles are changed while strategy and
benchmark configuration remain constant.

Resource Telemetry

Each query log stores CPU utilization, memory utilization, and optional
GPU telemetry (if available). Resource traces are not only diagnostic;
they are part of interpretation. A strategy that gains minor accuracy at
disproportionate compute cost may not be preferable in constrained
deployment settings.

Results

Strategy-Level Summary

Table [tab:agg] summarizes average performance across all benchmark
groups.

Weighted and ISP both reach the highest average accuracy (0.933) and F1
(0.933), while maintaining latency near 13.5–13.7 seconds. Debate
records the highest latency (59.3 seconds average), making it less
suitable for interactive settings in this hardware profile.

Per-Benchmark Behavior

Table [tab:bench] details benchmark-level breakdown.

On MMLU, all strategies reach 1.0 accuracy in this run configuration,
indicating low separation at the chosen sample size. On GSM8K, weighted
and ISP outperform majority by +0.2 absolute accuracy. On TruthfulQA,
weighted and ISP reach perfect scores in this run, and topic routing
also improves over majority.

Visual Trends

[Accuracy trend by strategy and benchmark group.]

[Latency profile of all strategies across benchmark groups.]

Figure 2 shows quality gains for weighted and ISP on reasoning-heavy
subsets, while Fig. 3 confirms debate as the dominant latency outlier.

[Relative share of average accuracy by strategy.]

[Cumulative progress trend during repeated evaluation runs.]

[Overall accuracy comparison across all evaluated strategies.]

The pie view in Fig. 4 offers a compact ranking perspective that is
useful for quick system selection in practice. The cumulative trend in
Fig. 5 is especially valuable during long runs because it reveals
whether a strategy is stabilizing or still drifting as more samples are
processed. Figure 6 provides a direct cross-strategy summary for quick
operational decisions.

Significance Findings

The most important paired comparisons are listed in Table [tab:sig].

For GSM8K and TruthfulQA, weighted and ISP significantly outperform
majority under both tests. Debate performs significantly below majority
on the same sets, despite offering richer cross-agent critique traces.

Per-Strategy Operational Profile

Majority voting is simple and stable, with the lowest implementation
complexity. It is a strong baseline for constrained nodes.

Dynamic weighted voting consistently improved answer quality in this run
while preserving latency close to majority. This made it the most
balanced strategy for interactive operation.

Inverse surprising popularity matched weighted performance and
occasionally recovered correct minority answers that plain majority
missed.

Topic routing improved agreement in category-focused prompts, but
misclassification in ambiguous prompts introduced small performance
fluctuations.

Debate generated richer intermediate traces and made disagreement
dynamics visible, but the two-round cost was substantial in CPU-heavy
settings.

Operational Lessons

What Worked Well

Three decisions produced the strongest practical gains:

1.  using asynchronous fan-out with strict timeout handling,

2.  treating strategy code as a pluggable module behind one API
    contract,

3.  exporting all benchmark records in machine-readable form before any
    plotting.

These decisions reduced regression risk during rapid iteration and made
the manuscript pipeline straightforward.

What Required Careful Tuning

The system required explicit controls in four areas:

-   CORS setup for browser-facing public demo pages,

-   health checks for each agent endpoint before benchmark launch,

-   prompt normalization for robust numeric answer extraction,

-   deterministic flags to limit drift across repeated runs.

Scaling to More Agents

The architecture scales without algorithm rewrites. New nodes are added
by extending the agent configuration list. The orchestrator already
supports agent subset selection per query, enabling both full-ensemble
and targeted routing runs.

Security and Deployment Hardening

Network Segmentation

All model agents are kept on a private subnet and are not exposed
directly to the public internet. Only the orchestrator endpoint is
published through a controlled tunnel path. This layout limits blast
radius and prevents direct probing of individual model runtimes.

Endpoint Protection

Deployment guidance includes strict CORS allowlists for browser access,
service-level health checks, and least-privilege firewall rules. During
testing, permissive CORS was used briefly for connectivity diagnosis,
then narrowed to approved origins for normal operation.

Credential and Artifact Hygiene

Experiment outputs can include prompt and answer text. For this reason,
logs are versioned as research artifacts but should be reviewed for
sensitive payloads before public release. Access tokens used for
repository automation must be short-lived and rotated immediately after
use.

The network segmentation and endpoint protection choices above follow
the same zero-trust and AI-driven detection principles explored for
serverless firewall architectures in , where intrusion detection and
cross-cloud security orchestration are combined with least-privilege
access control.

Service Continuity

Systemd units are used for orchestrator and agent auto-start. Health
endpoints are polled before launching benchmark batches. This reduced
run interruption and prevented partial benchmark folders caused by
service restarts.

Reproducibility and Artifact Package

Generated Outputs

Each experiment run generates:

-   CSV summary and raw records,

-   JSON result packages,

-   PNG figures,

-   LaTeX tables for direct paper inclusion.

Paper and Web Synchronization

The same result files are mirrored into:

-   IEEE manuscript directory,

-   Overleaf upload package,

-   public web report assets.

This avoids manual copy errors and keeps the public dashboard aligned
with manuscript values.

Minimal Reproduction Commands

    curl -s http://127.0.0.1:8000/health
    curl -s http://127.0.0.1:8000/agents
    python run_experiments.py \
      --orchestrator-url http://127.0.0.1:8000 \
      --benchmarks mmlu,gsm8k,truthfulqa \
      --strategies majority,weighted,isp,topic,debate \
      --repetitions 5 --seed 42 --deterministic

Limitations and Future Work

Two limitations should be considered when interpreting the current
results.

First, benchmark sample counts in rapid-cycle experiments can compress
performance variance. Larger evaluation sets will provide tighter
confidence intervals and may reveal finer ranking shifts among majority,
weighted, and ISP.

Second, the deployed models are compact variants selected for local
feasibility. Extending the same architecture to larger parameter scales
may change the balance between latency and answer quality.

Future work will focus on three directions: adaptive budget allocation
by query difficulty, confidence calibration across heterogeneous models,
and richer consensus rules that combine first-order votes with textual
rationale quality.

Threats to Validity

Internal validity: although deterministic controls were applied,
normalization rules for open-text answers can still influence exact
scoring boundaries on edge cases.

Construct validity: accuracy and F1 capture correctness, but they do not
fully reflect response usefulness in long-form or multi-step user tasks.

External validity: the reported latency profile reflects the tested
local hardware and model sizes. Different hardware classes or model
families may shift the quality-latency frontier.

Statistical validity: repeated trials and paired tests were used, but
larger repetition counts would reduce uncertainty further and improve
detection power for small strategy differences.

Conclusion

This paper presented a complete distributed local ensemble platform for
language-model research, from node orchestration through statistical
reporting. The system supports five aggregation strategies under one
interface, records rich run metadata, and exports publication-ready
artifacts automatically.

Across the current benchmark configuration, weighted and inverse
surprising popularity delivered the best average quality while keeping
latency within interactive bounds for local deployment. Debate provided
useful interpretability signals but imposed a large runtime penalty.

The main contribution is not only an algorithm comparison, but a
reproducible engineering workflow that links implementation,
measurement, significance testing, and manuscript production in one
consistent pipeline.

Acknowledgment

The authors thank the Department of Computer and Information Science at
Gannon University for infrastructure access and technical feedback
during deployment and evaluation.
